---
title: "A revelation about libraries"
date: '2014-01-25T18:47:44-06:00'
status: draft
path: '/draft1658'
author: 'ES Ivy'
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 1658
category:
    - Other
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Libraries were the entertainment rooms of grand homes past. Television rooms are now our entertainment rooms. It’s not entirely bad. If you think about it, literature is stories. Movies and television shows are stories too. I think it’s interesting that we devote 12 years of studying the form of entertainment of literature, but we don’t study movies or television in school. Also, contrary to popular though, television and movies can be a form of learning. Just like libraries can contain nonfiction, informational books, movies and televisions also have documentaries. They also have historical fiction, just like books.

Some of my favorites:

The King’s Speech – I’ve read a lot about the British Royal family (research for the royalty in the Miri Attwater books) and from what I know, this is very true to history. I even recognized some of the scenes from real photos of the royal family that I’ve seen. However, the language makes it not suitable for children. But, the language is also very true to the event and a pivotal part of the speech therapy. I think this is the only movie I’ve ever seen where I consider the language justified.

Queen Rania

Documentary on the Queen of Iran

Coral Sea Dreaming

Lewis and Clark Expedition on pbs

What are some of you favorite documentaries or historical movies?