---
title: "Success factors discard"
date: '2014-05-05T19:09:55-05:00'
status: draft
path: '/draft2050'
author: 'ES Ivy'
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 2050
category:
    - Other
tag: []
post_format: []
---
As I explored the idea of whether or not stress, test, and retest was the only way to success in high school, I read the book by Amanda Ripley that compares the educational system in the United States to the educational systems of some other countries. The take away message I left with was that test, stress and retest didn’t lead to the creation of independent thinkers. Loads of homework wasn’t required to learn loads of information. And that free time was important.

This followed along my line of thinking that taking a full AP load in high school isn’t necessary. Not only is it not necessary to learn lots of information, but it means we’re trying to copy countries like South Korea, who *aren’t happy with their educational system because of the stress that it causes. They don’t think they’re getting the results they want out of it, either.*

And yet, when I went to [Amanda Ripley’s blog](http://www.amandaripley.com/blog/when-your-college-roommate-is-one-of-the-smartest-kids-in-the-world) for more information, I feel like I’m getting a different message.

In a blog post about [why the United States needs to improve it’s educational system](http://www.amandaripley.com/blog/when-your-college-roommate-is-one-of-the-smartest-kids-in-the-world) to keep up with the rest of the world, she points how [an impressive Stanford student was motivated to study harder by her roommate from South Korea.](http://inthetank.newamerica.net/blog/2013/08/my-college-roommate-was-one-smartest-kids-world-heres-how-it-changed-me) While I applaud anyone who sees excellence and is motivated to improve, I thought that Ripley’s book pointed out [how the South Korea system was *not* the best path to educational excellence.](http://192.168.1.34:4945/draft1938)

And here’s a question: If South Korea’s schools are so much better then ours why did the student come here to go to college?

Lack of motivation seems to be thought of as a big factor in the a lack of success in schools. But are kids who only get 5 or less hours of sleep a night because of their homework and activities really lacking motivation? The difference here may be talking about students as a whole vs. students at the top. Either way it’s a caution about generalizing.

The number of Advanced Placement classes offered and the number of exams taken is repeatedly held up as a measure of whether or not a high school is taking academics seriously. And yet, our personal experience is that AP classes and AP testing feed into the models of stress, test, and retest Ripley pointed out as having multiple drawbacks.

It may be a case of me cherry-picking the evidence for views I hold. Or, it might be a case of Ripley not having studied the AP system. In any case, I will continue looking into both the pros and cons and see if it changes my current views.