---
title: 'Success Factors: Outliers'
date: '2014-05-29T10:27:19-05:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=2123'
author: 'ES Ivy'
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 2123
category:
    - Education
    - 'Education &amp; Success'
tag: []
post_format: []
---
*Outliers: The Story of Success,* by Malcom Gladwell had been on my reading list for awhile, so when it was recommended to me as a follow up to World Class Learners, I moved it to the top. Among other things, World Class Learners used Steve Jobs, an Outlier, as an example of a successful entrepreneur so much that I was curious to see an analysis of his success.

*Outliers* was very entertaining and easy to read. However, the entire second half of the book didn’t seem to fit with the first. The first part is titled Opportunity. It was devoted to analyzing the success of “outliers,” people who’s successes stand out above the pack. The second half is titled Legacy. It’s tries to show how culture leads to the success or failings of a society as a whole. Gladwell fails in his attempt to tie the two parts together.

I’ll start by looking at the first part, Opportunity, because it’s the part I found the most useful. (And, well, it’s the *first* part, so it also makes sense.)

A lot of the first half is dedicated to showing how the luck of timing plays an important part in success. Pro-sports players tend to have birth months that give them an advantage in their respective age-based youth leagues. If you want to be one of the richest people in all of history, it helps to be born during the years of 1931-1940. (Oops! I missed that by a little. Rats!) Computer mega-stars were likely to be born in the years 1954-55 and got early access to computers when they still weren’t common. (Just in case you’re trying to computer my age, I missed that too.) Those are the birth years of Bill Joy (Sun Microsystems and Java), Bill Gates (Microsoft), and Steve Jobs (Apple), among others.

Timing is important, Gladwell argues, because it gave the Outliers opportunities to amass 10,000 hours of practice at a young and stellar age. He goes a lot into the 10,000 hours rule, but I’ll just summarize by saying that there are many examples that show that’s the amount of practice time it takes to really excel at a skill.

Acquiring that skill leads to more opportunities.

It’s snowball effect and it helps if, because of timing, you’re on a good, snow-covered slope to begin with.

He then goes on to show that the 10,000 hours of practice is more important to acquiring the needed skill than intelligence or talent.

One example he uses to illustrate the lesser importance of intelligence is the famous Lewis Terman intelligence study that started in the 1920s. Terman was trying to identify gifted kids and predict the next world leaders, such future Nobel Prize winners. While he did identify some successful people, he failed to select a single stellar leader, and he picked just as many more more failures. Not only that, but his study discarded two future Nobel Prize winners as not being “smart enough” to be geniuses.

In addition to traditional intelligence, Gladwell asserts that you also need “practical intelligence,” or basically the ability figure out what you need and to talk other people into giving it to you. It’s an ability to talk your way out of any problem. Basically, it entails it means you know how to ask for special favors, and get them. He gives examples of people, like Steve Jobs and a successful immigrant garment entrepreneur, being able to do this.

I found this really interesting, because I learned that I shouldn’t ask for people to make exceptions for you. If you ask too much, people will resent you. And when it comes to our own kids and school, we’ve been doing about the same thing. While we have been teaching them to stand up for themselves, I feel like we also keep telling them that they’re one of a lot of kids, the teacher has a lot to do, don’t expect them to make an exception for you….yada, yada, yada.

To some extent this is true. But from the biography of Steve Jobs, \[Steve Jobs, by Walter Isaacson,\] it’s clear that he thought he was special. He not only *thought* he was special; he *knew* he was special. Look where that got him.

Gladwell closes Part 1 with a study that traces the success of Jewish lawyers in the 1970s to their roots in the immigrant garment business. He attributes those success to a heritage, which was at first a drawback, that turned into an advantage by a combination of hard work and luck in timing. Basically, it boiled down to that all these lawyers owed their success to …

Legacy

Which is part 2 of Outliers.

While I found this part entertaining, I don’t think it really related to the success of the Outliers in part 1. Maybe it was just because of the reason I was reading this book, to try to figure out how to guide success, colored how I approached it.

Some of it also feels like a bit of a stretch. Basically, Gladwell tries to show that everything from the family feuds in the Appalachian Mountains, to a rash of plane crashes by Korean Airline pilots, to the success of Chinese students in math, can be explained by culture that goes back hundreds of years. In fact, as best I could tell this entire second half of the book had the sole purpose of trying to prove why Chinese students excel at math because their ancestors were rice patty farmers. That’s a lot of book for that point. In particular, the long and detailed chapter about the Korean airline crashes could have been greatly condensed.

Gladwell then goes on to explain that Americans, and in particular poor Americans, aren’t good at math because their legacy didn’t teach them persistence and the right attitude to excel in math.

And this can be traced all the way back to how peasants farmed in France.

Now bear with me here. It seems a lot more believable when you follow the story in Outliers.

Until you realize that now he’s going to tie this to the math difficulties of primarily African American and Hispanic Students.

Okay, I’m being a little hard on him here. But when you simplify it, I think the stretch become more obvious.

Anyway, he does make some interesting points when he illustrates how the KIPP Academy teaches math. KIPP Academy is an experimental public school of primarily African American and Hispanic students from low-income, single-family homes in New York City. Gladwell does make a good case for the way KIPP teachers math. In addition, KIPP requires orchestra, long school hours, more hours of study, 6-day school weeks, and year-long school. All this is done in an attempt to catch the students up academically and teach them perseverance, things they’re lacking because of their heritage.

By the time students graduate from KIPP, the increases in their math and reading skills are phenomenal. But if you’ve been following this blog, you might recognize KIPP from the post about \[*How Children Succeed.\]* Unfortunately, the college completion rates for KIPP students have been very low, something they’re trying to change with an intensive mentoring program through college. If successful, it may mean that the success rate has more to do with the mentoring than the rigourous schoolwork. You can read more about the KIPP program in \[my post about *How Children Succeed.*\]

But back to *Outliers* and outlying success. That was what this book was about, right? Well, the first half was anyway.

In the end, Gladwell tries to tie Part 1, Opportunity, to Part 2, Legacy, by saying that Outliers owe their success, in large part, to the legacy of history and community.

“\[Outliers\] are products of history and community, of opportunity and legacy. Their success i not exceptional or mysterious. It is grounded in a web of advantages and inheritances, some deserved, some not, some earned, some just plain lucky — …”

In other words, Outliers owe their success to luck. Luck that can be explained, but luck none-the-less.

I disagree.

There’s nothing like taking the evidence presented to you and thinking that you can come up with a better explanation, even though you’re getting all the information from a secondary source. 🙂 (In other words, I didn’t get to see all the evidence Galdwell collected, just what he presented to me in this book.) But I think all the information can point to a different, more hopeful and more active interpretation.

I think *Outliers* shows that luck can *help,* but it isn’t all that’s required. What’s more, you can give luck a hand. Because when you take the time to practice something diligently, just by exposure more opportunities will come your way.

Oh, and and you can also give luck a hand by *asking* for opportunities.

Which brings me to one of the things I think Gladwell missed. When it comes to the computer Outliers, they didn’t just *ask* for opportunities, they *took* them.

Jobs, Gates, and Joy were all willing to break and bend rules to feed their obsession and amass their 10,000 hours. They all grew up when computers were less common and time on them was carefully allotted. Joy hacked a bug to get more time on a time-share computer. Gates snuck out of his house in the middle of the night to get more computer time and stole so many passwords that he and a friend crashed a computer. This was back when it was an even bigger deal than it is today. (And if you’re computer has crashed lately, I bet you can appreciate that calling a computer crash a “big deal” is an understatement, even now.)

I’m sure if I tried to do something like “bend” the rules to get more computer time, I’d get caught. But Gates and a friend did get caught. They even got banned from using that computer, and there weren’t many computers around back in those dark ages, so it could have been devastating. But they didn’t let that stop them. In spite of the difficulty, they just found another computer they could get time on.

So now *that’s* a tricky question for a parent. How do you teach your child to test the line without going over it? I mean, today you can go to prison for stealing passwords.

Thinking of learning, Gladwell asserts that practical intelligence, the ability to get what you want out of others, is learned. While I agree that *some* of it is learned, I also think some of it’s innate. There are definitely some people who are born more “people-persons.” And that’s not me. But I do think it’s something I can work on, and try to help my kids work on it as well, so that it’ll become more natural to them as they grow up.

Gladwell also asserts that once you pass that intelligence threshold, divergent thinking – or creativity – becomes important. I like this idea, because while I know I’m not way up there at the level of a genius, I like to think I’m creative. Gladwell gives an example of a creativity test where you have to come up with as many uses as you can think of for a brick and a blanket. Go ahead. Give it a try if you like.

My husband gave one of my daughters the test with amusing results. (Hint, the most creative people, apparently, come up with some rather devious uses. Heh, heh, heh.)

The importance of divergent thinking makes sense to me, because I’ve always thought that imagination and creativity were important when I was doing scientific research for my graduate degree. Unfortunately, Gladwell doesn’t give any evidence to back up this claim.

Perhaps some of these different conclusions I drew led to me coming to a different conclusion for the book as a whole.

Let’s look at the factors Gladwell has determined lead to success. Some of them are controllable, and some of them are not.

- *Uncontrollable:* timing, opportunities, family background
- *Controllable:* dedication, drive, 10,000 hours of practice

I think it’s important to concentrate on what you *can* control, not what you can’t.

The conclusion I drew from Outliers was that in order to achieve success you have to be willing to put in the time, the dedication, and indeed the obsession to get to the 10,000 hours required to make you stand out. Along with this, you need to have or develop the practical intelligence to get what you need from other people.

However, if you do that and still don’t find “outlying” success, don’t despair. Because luck, history, and community have a hand in it, too. This can be a hard to accept when you’ve worked so hard, but maybe the answer lies not so much in accepting defeat, as realizing that you don’t have to have achieved the success of an Outlier, to still be a success. There are degrees of success.

For those with the drive to get to this point, realizing this might be harder than the actual work itself.

So how would this apply to high school? Because, after all, that’s the reason I set out on this quest. If the traditional school definition of success with punishingly hard classes and stellar grades doesn’t really help you learn the true path to life-long success, then what does?

Let’s go back to the computer mega-stars for a bit. Everyone knows that Steve Jobs and Bill Gates are famous for not graduating from college. While Steve Jobs route seems to have been a bit more circuitous and rebellious, perhaps Bill Gates was more of an issue of knowing an opportunity and taking advantage of it when you see it. (On the reading list, biography of Bill Gates.)

But what about Bill Joy? Bill Joy did graduate from college. And he has a graduate degree from Berkeley. According to *Outliers,* Joy “had been voted ‘Most Studious Student’ by his graduating \[high school\] class.” But once he discovered programming at the University of Michigan, he recalls “I was spending more time in the Computer Science Center than on my classes…I was probably programming eight or ten hours a day…”

That probably didn’t result in a stellar GPA. But it did result in stellar success.

While the story of Bill Joy shows that you don’t have to discard a traditional education to be a success, I think the lesson is that you need to take the time to let yourself be obsessed with something, so you can learn a skill or gain expertise. It’s hard to do that if you’re taking a course load that takes up all your time doing what someone else thinks is important.

For other analyses of *Outliers,* thoughts on the 10,000 hour rule, IQ, and success, check out the following:

[What did Malcolm Gladwell actually say about the 10,000 hour rule? ](http://hardsci.wordpress.com/2014/03/25/what-did-malcolm-gladwell-actually-say-about-the-10000-hour-rule/ "Outliers") on the blog, [The Hardest Science](http://hardsci.wordpress.com/)

[The Trouble With Malcolm Gladwell](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2013/10/malcolm_gladwell_critique_david_and_goliath_misrepresents_the_science.html "The Trouble with Malcolm Gladwell")

[Yes, IQ Really Matters](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/04/what_do_sat_and_iq_tests_measure_general_intelligence_predicts_school_and.2.html "IQ and SAT as measures for success")

[Ted Talks, Angela Lee Duckworth: The key to success? Grit](http://www.ted.com/talks/angela_lee_duckworth_the_key_to_success_grit#t-54056 "Angela Duckworth TED talk")

So, what do you think? Is time in high school better spent acing all the hardest classes or finding a passion and practicing it? What did you do, and did it get you where you want to be?