---
title: "Success factors: how much does language shape our possibilities"
date: '2014-05-16T11:16:19-05:00'
status: draft
path: '/draft2120'
author: 'ES Ivy'
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 2120
category:
    - Other
tag: []
post_format: []
---
It might not be our schools that fail to turn out math high scorers or accidentally turn out entrepreneurs, it might be our language.

Outliers – names for numbers in chinese –

Buried in the chapter in Outliers where Malcolm Gladwell tries to explain that the success of Chinese students in math is due to their rice patty farming heritage, is a little nugget about language. It seems that the Chinese *language* is uniquely structure to talk about numbers in a way that it makes *math* easier to grasp.

To begin with, the names for Chinese numbers are shorter than the English names for numbers. If you’re trying to remember a string of numbers, you try to “say them” in your head. Since you can say numbers faster in Chinese, you can easily memorize a longer list of numbers.

Then we like to have “special names” for numbers.

While we have numbers like forty and sixty, we also have twenty and thirty and fifty, which kind of sound like the digits two, three, and five in the number, but not really.

While we have fourteen and sixteen, but then we also have thirteen and fifteen. Not to mention eleven and twelve! On top of that, the order of the digits in the “teens” are backwards compared to the twenties and so forth. This makes it more difficult to mentally do math, like addition. In order to “line up” the digits in your head, you first have to parse the names to figure out where to put them.

TED Radio Hour – Spoken and Unspoken, Vietnamese doesn’t have subjunctive which allows you to think about what could be. Is our success due to that more than our schooling system?