---
title: success factors: how important is the SAT and IQ?
date: '2014-05-18T11:34:19-05:00'
status: draft
path: '/?p=2171'
author: 'ES Ivy'
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 2171
category:
    - Education
    - 'Education &amp; Success'
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Thought at the end of this: this might have little to do with adapting the school experience for our kids.

[Yes, IQ Really Matters](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2014/04/what_do_sat_and_iq_tests_measure_general_intelligence_predicts_school_and.html)

Says the opposite of Outliers.

Discusses the changes to the SAT. With regard to whether or not the SAT predicts success, they say the SAT does well (although not perfect) while a combination of SAT and high school GPA does the best and unlike other suggested methods, you can put a number on it. However, they judge success by college GPA – which may or may not correspond to success after college? Or am I just biased because of the path I took. How successful would I be if I hadn’t “dropped out” of the game.

Although I think I’d probably be doing research somewhere and not totally happy about it. Maybe?

But they do go on to track success past college – according to a study, those who score already in the top 1/10 of 1% by age 13 had an annual income in the top 5% of Americans.

That study is here: [Beyond the Threshold Hypothesis,](http://cdp.sagepub.com/content/19/6/346.short)  
[Even Among the Gifted and Top Math/Science Graduate Students, Cognitive Abilities, Vocational Interests, and Lifestyle Preferences Matter for Career Choice, Performance, and Persistence ](http://cdp.sagepub.com/content/19/6/346.short)

– can only see abstract. So it says it matters, but I can’t see the discussion. has papers that cite the work, but you have to pay $35 to see the article.

This paper has some thoughts on rethinking GT

[Rethinking Giftedness and Gifted Education](http://psi.sagepub.com/content/12/1/3.abstract)  
[A Proposed Direction Forward Based on Psychological Science](http://psi.sagepub.com/content/12/1/3.abstract)

Even from the long abstract I’m not sure what it’s going to say, might do google searched on the authors.

The original article does go on to say this: “<span style="color: #281b21;">None of this is to say that IQ, whether measured with the SAT or a traditional intelligence test, is an indicator of value or worth. Nobody should be judged, negatively or positively, on the basis of a test score. A test score is a prediction, not a prophecy, and doesn’t say anything specific about what a person will or will not achieve in life. A high IQ doesn’t guarantee success, and a low IQ doesn’t guarantee failure.”</span>

Also has references to Duckworth.

I guess I come down on the side of this is controversial enough that we shouldn’t leave those kids on the edge out of the GT programs. Of course, if you take the kids on the edge, the edge is moved. I think then it becomes subjective as to whether or not the kids can handle the classes and programs they’re then partaking in.