---
title: Monarchies, studying history, and the structure of governments
date: '2013-10-02T02:58:29-05:00'
status: draft
path: '/?p=861'
author: 'ES Ivy'
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 861
category:
    - Other
tag: []
post_format: []
---
I find history much more interesting through a study of the people who filled it, rather than the battles they fought.

I first discovered this when I was trying to figure out how to structure a mermaid government for my book, Miri Attwater and the Ocean’s Secret. That’s not entirely true. As a girl one of my favorite types of books were historical novels about the childhoods of famous women. (Back then they were classified as biographies, but now they would be classified differently.) I only read about famous women. I had absolutely no interest reading about boys who became famous men. There were lots of them and they were boring. 🙂

Miri Attwater was the book I tried to write without doing any research. But every time I tried to gloss over a fact, like what kind of fish might have swum by, it bothered me. The writing felt thin, like there was no substance behind it. I ran into a similar, and more complicated problem, when it came to how the government worked. I just couldn’t reconcile myself to the thought that Miri could be raised in a republic (democracy) and then be plopped down into a monarchy and be okay with it. The whole idea that someone is qualified to lead a country just because they were born into the right family just didn’t seem right to me, especially since any girls were passed over if they had a younger brother.

Then I remembered that in Great Britain, while they have a Queen, she doesn’t rule. I wasn’t really sure how that worked, so I started looking into how their government had evolved.

I read lots about different men, different battles, and different conspiracies. For a while I got sidetracked reading about Elinor of Aquitane. Then it was Queen Elizabeth I and a little about her sister, Bloody Mary. I read about Queen Victoria. Girls again. I would probably understand more about how the British kept their monarchy – but took their power – if they’d had a few more queens. But as I understand it, the end result is this.

Then Queen has the power to advise, but that’s it. She meets regularly with the Prime Minister and they discuss the affairs of government. No one knows exactly what’s said during those meetings because Queen Elizabeth II is very discrete, which is probably where some of her power lies. It is said that at this point in her life she can lend an ear and give a historical perspective to events in a way that no one else in government can. Otherwise, her job is to be represent the government in other countries and to the public. In extension, she also serves as a connection between the former members of the British Empire, now countries connected by their history as the British Commonwealth.

The governing parliament of the English government is made up of two bodies, the House of Lords and the House of Commons. Until as recently as 1999, the House of Lords was made up entirely of nobles and the seats were inherited. The House of Commons is elected. The House of Lords has fewer members. I think of them as the counterpoint to the United States Senate. The House of Commons is bigger and more crowded, which is similar to the United States House of Representatives.

As for the rest of English government, the position of Prime Minister isn’t written down anywhere. There’s no law that decreed that there would be one, it just evolved. The position is similar in function to the President of the United States. Only the Prime Minister isn’t elected by a public vote (or even indirectly through an electoral college.) And they don’t have an election every four years. At any time Parliament can decide they don’t like the Prime Minister anymore, call for a vote, and vote to see which party has the most support in Parliament. The Prime Minister is always the head of the ruling party in Parliament (the House of Commons?). During Queen Elizabeth II’s rule it evolved still further to be elected directly by that party, the monarch just lends their approval. (Before that, the prime minister was appointed by the monarch, but they tried to pick who the party wanted. This can get tricky when there are lots of factions in the party and the monarch is trying to impartial.) So, the ruling party picks a leader and Queen Elizabeth asks the prime minister if he or she would “form a government.” Whatever that means. Don’t they always have a government? If I’m confused on any point, feel free to correct me in the comments. But, I won’t delver further into that and just get back to how this relates to the government of Merspersia.

While a monarch with absolutely power wouldn’t work for Miri’s mermaids, it seemed like the Queen should have a little more power. So I decided that first there would be a governing body with two houses, called the Assembly. One house is made up of nobles with inherited titles, the House of Poseidon. The other house is made up of elected members, the House of Mer.

The monarch is similar to the monarchy of Britain in that they’re born into their position. But they have more power, much like the President of the United States. The monarch of Mersperisa has veto power, but they can’t get a law passed without the support of the legislature. And as revealed in Miri Attwater and All that Glitters, before taking the throne the monarch has to be confirmed by the Assembly.

So, the government of Mersperia is a blend of the government of the United States and our mother country of Great Britain.